- Feature Name: `init`
- Start Date: 2019-12-18

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

`ctf init` command initializes a directory for playing a single CTF.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

It is useful to store files related to a single CTF in a dedicated directory in a structured way and have tools to
manage them.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

Playing a CTF involves working with a lot of things, including: challenge descriptions, binaries, exploits, patches,
notes, docker images and containers, qemu images and virtual machines, flags and writeups. `ctftool` offers a systematic
approach to doing that by storing them (or references to them) in a git repository.

`ctf init` can be used to create such repositories as follows:

```
$ mkdir 2019.09.28-PwnThyBytes_CTF_2019
$ cd 2019.09.28-PwnThyBytes_CTF_2019
$ ctf init
```

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

``ctf init`` command does the following:

- Creates a git repository in the current directory.
- Populates initial `.ctf` and `.gitignore` files.
- Creates an initial commit.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Playing CTFs may be addictive. Writing tools may be a waste of time.

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

git is used in order to store solution history, as well as to be able to roll back unwanted operations.

git-lfs is not used - it might sound appealing to store challenge binaries (which may be multi-gigabyte VM images) in
it, but since they don't change, it would only create operational overhead.

`.ctf` is a single YAML file, because it keeps things simple on the implementation side, and is easy to edit and merge
manually (unlike JSON). Having a `.ctf` directory with multiple files or multiple `.ctf` files (e.g., global and per
challenge) could make edits and merges even simpler, but the extra complexity is not worth it.

`.gitignore` file excludes everything that is not managed by `ctftool` in order to avoid committing things like IDA
databases by accident.

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

`git init` command.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

None.

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

`ctf init` will be wrapped by `ctf clone` (which will combine `init`, `remote add`, `fetch` and `checkout`).
